# 1.2 Berlin Housing Crisis History  

The history of housing in Berlin is a story of constant crisis and adaptation. Throughout its history, the city has undergone a series of cycles of destruction, reconstruction and transformation. This chapter tells the recent history of Berlin from the post-war period to the present day.

# 1945-1989. Post-World War II Developments       
When World War II ended, Berlin was heavily damaged and destroyed. All political parties perceived the housing shortage as the most pressing problem of the time and supported state investment into housing and strong regulation of the market. In this respect, estates built under socialism in East Berlin and under capitalism in West Berlin share many commonalities, despite the political differences of their respective regimes during the division (1949–1990) and particularly during the times of the Berlin Wall (1961–1989)(Urban, 2018). During this period, the authorities in East and West Berlin viewed housing construction as a key instrument of social policy.    

**West Berlin Housing**     
In the West, most multifamily buildings—both small and large estates—were built by state-sponsored institutions, owned by municipalities or sometimes other public bodies such as trade unions (Urban, 2018). Between 1952 and 1970, over 85% of new housing construction was publicly subsidized, and frequently constructed by state-owned housing companies operating under the principle of common public interest (Fields & Uffer, 2016)   

Interventionist housing policy, which funneled large amounts of public disproportionate funding into housing, was set up in the early 1950s, and at the time approved by the West German Federal Government, ultimately aimed at sustaining the city’s population levels (Lindenthal and Eichholtz, 2012). Despite government support, by the 1970s these neighbourhoods were criticised for their social isolation and standardised architecture, becoming a symbol of the bureaucratic approach to housing.

**East Berlin Housing**   
In East Germany, the paradigm change towards large estates was far more comprehensive (Urban, 2018). After the Building Conference in 1955, the GDR began the ‘industrialisation of the construction industry’, which led to the mass construction of houses from pre-fabricated reinforced concrete panels (Plattenbau). Private landownership was almost entirely abandoned and state-led housing associations provided mass housing, becoming the most conspicuous urban form (Fields and Uffer, 2016). Although the new mass construction embodied the idea of socialist equality, over time it became associated with uniformity and social control by the state.   
    
# 1989‑1991. Политическое и Пространсвенное Объединение    
The fall of the Berlin Wall meant not only political but also spatial unification of two separate housing systems. The unification of the city provided for a massive shock to housing supply.     

After the opening up of the East, households could live in East Berlin or in surrounding Brandenburg instead of West Berlin. This increased competition is hypothesized to lower prices in peripheral locations of West Berlin. In the same time, the central quarters became “more central”, since they are now in the middle of an overall larger metropolitan area (Lindenthal and Eichholtz, 2012).       

Municipal policy towards Berlin’s housing estates was somewhat contradictory. On the one hand, in the early 1990s, both the local authority and the national government poured generous subsidies into the housing stock supporting renovation. On the other hand, along with increasing international popularity of market-centred ideas, market was turning against social housing, and thus against the every institution from which these estates derived (Urban, 2018). 

# 1992-2012. Privatisation, Financialisation and Gentrification
Berlin’s fiscal instability motivated privatisation of its state-owned housing stock and  abandonment of social housing subsidies. In 1991, the city owned approximately 480,000 housing units (28% of the entire housing stock), but by the early 2000s, most of this housing had been sold to private and institutional investors (Fields and Uffer, 2016). While privatisation created expectations that private investors would contribute their financial resources to modernize the housing stock, Berlin’s housing demand was low.     

Between 2000 and 2006, Berlin sold 100,000 dwelling units to international investors, thus sacrificing a system working with long-term success for short-term profit (Fields and Uffer, 2016). Private investors were speculating on a rising market seeing an opportunity to increase rents through modernisation and luxurious upgrading (Urban, 2018).   

Research by Fields and Uffer (2016) shows that private investment has exacerbated inequality in access to housing, and global financialisation mechanisms have come to determine urban policy more strongly than social priorities. High-yield investors have renovated residential buildings, increased rents and removed flats from the social rental system. This process has been accompanied by the gentrification of central areas and the social displacement of low-income residents to the periphery.

# 2012 - 2024. New Actors, Old Problems
Since the early 2010s, Berlin has been experiencing a new wave of housing crisis.  
    
Compared to other major German cities, Berlin still has potential for land use both in the city and in the surrounding area (Berlin Strategy, 2018). Which makes it unique for urban planning research.   
    
At the same time, a variety of challenges are already looming that the city will have to overcome in the coming years. Above all, these include tasks associated with urban growth. According to the Senate Department for Urban Development, Building and Housing (2022), Berlin already reached a population of 3.75 million. The population forecast assumes that the number of residents will rise to around 3.93 million by 2030. The growth is primarily driven by immigration from abroad (CBRE GmbH, 2025). Such residents accounted for 24.4 percent of Berlin’s population in 2024. The number of newcomers who moved to Berlin from abroad was twice as high as the number of people who moved to the capital from other parts of Germany.   
    
Opportunities accompanying this growth include the potential for more affordable housing. However, these developments often come with specific spatial requirements and property policies (Berlin Strategy, 2018). Moreover, the application of planning law become particularly challenging in light of rising costs, inflation, and high interest rates, which carry the risk of social inequality, spatial
polarisation, and housing crisis.


# Conclusion    
Berlin Housing History is a story of recurring crises and compromises. The contradiction between housing as a social right and housing as a market commodity remains unresolved.

