# 2.1 Overview

Chapter Capacities, Demand & Spatial Distribution gives an overview of Berlin's student housing market. It focuses on evaluation of initial market capacities and demand and how they spread across the city.

## What? Student Housing Market: Capacities, Demand, and Spatial Distribution

The student housing market can be understood as the intersection between demand — represented by the number of international students and their housing needs — and capacity, defined by the number of available purpose build student accommodations. 

By definition given in MLP Studentenwohnreport (2024):  

**Demand** - mainly depends on the number of students, which often changes by location. Students also compete with young workers, trainees, or commuters, so student numbers only partly show demand. For this research, the target group is international students enrolled in Berlin’s higher education, at any level, regardless of current residency.   

**Capacity**- is determined by the number of advertised apartments in the corresponding segments. Alternative housing options, such as student union dormitories, are also available. During the research process, all categories will be merged in a broader term - `purpose-built student accommodation`, categorised by type of ownership. 

For the simplicity of data collection, student housing market will be understood as the intersection between demand — represented by the number of international students and their housing needs — and capacity, defined by the number of available purpose build student accommodations. 

In a broader perspective, both demand and capacity are dynamic parameters influenced by university services, urban policy and social drivers. A more detailed discussion of their interrelation will be presented in the Discussion Chapter. 

## Why? Initial Student Housing Market Description

The aim of this chapter is to describe the current state of Berlin’s student housing market by answering the following research questions:

**Where are student accommodations and universities located?**

**How are they spatially distributed across the city?**

## How? Spatial Data Analysis and Spatial Econometrics

The descriptive process combines Urban Data Mining, Statistical Analysis, and Spatial Autocorrelation to examine market characteristics and explore spatial relationships. 

**Urban Data Mining**   
Urban Data Mining is a data collection method that aims to gain new insights by identifying patterns, exceptions, and anomalies in the data (Giseke et al., 2021). It involves selecting, exploring, cleaning, interpreting, and visualising datasets. Data Mining also involves transforming data from non-spatial to spatial. Therefore, it can be seen as the first step of Spatial Data Analysis (SDA). Due to the need to work with large amounts of data. Data Mining is primarily achieved through software, with Python Programming and Artificial Intelligence methods used to further develop urban environments and improve residents' daily lives (Giseke et al., 2021).

Urban Data Mining is used - one of the most time-consuming stages. Since there is no pre-made data set that combines data on all student dormitories and educational institutions in Berlin. Therefore, the data had to be collected in two stages: first manually, then automatical preparation. The quality of manual collection depends directly on the time spent on it and carries the risk of incomplete data, as different data sources indicate different sets of attributes. Meanwhile, automatic data preparation allows you to identify inaccuracies in the data and fill in missing attributes. 

**Descriptive Statictics**  
Descriptive Statistics is a set of statistical procedures that summarize the essential characteristics of a distribution through calculating and plotting. Statistical methods are employed to analyse spatial data, quantify a spatial process, discover hidden patterns or unexpected trends and model these data in a geographic context(Giseke et al., 2021). 

Descriptive statistics in the context of this work is considered as the initial stage of data analysis, which allows a quantitative assessment of the characteristics of student housing and higher educational institutions, as well as the identification of initial quantitative patterns. 

**Spatial Autocorrelation**  
Spatial Autocorrelation is the degree of spatial dependency, association, or correlation between the value of an observation of a spatial entity and the values of neighboring observations of the same variable. It is unlikely that the spatial distribution of Student Accommodations and Higher Education Universities will be homogeneous in the entire Berlin due to the nonuniformity and noncontinuity of space. The magnitude of spatial autocorrelation may vary from one neighborhood to another due to spatial heterogeneity. To estimate spatial autocorrelation at the local level, the is a need to use local measures of spatial autocorrelation, like Local Moran’s I index (Grekousis, 2020). 

Unlike Urban Data Mining and Descriptive Statistics, Spatial Autocorrelation works directly with spatial dimensions and allows you to identify patterns in the spatial distribution of student accommodations and higher education institutions, as well as evaluate the spatial differences between them. 

Through the combination of quantitative, spatial, and computational approaches, this chapter establishes a foundation for the empirical analysis of Berlin’s student housing system. It links theoretical concepts of demand and capacity with practical spatial evidence, creating a bridge between urban data science and housing policy research.