# 3.1 Overview   

Chapter Student Housing Market Imbalance analyses the imbalance between university demand and student housing capacity. 

## What? Student Housing Market Imbalance

Student Housing Market Imbalance can be understood as a set of statistically significant patterns that constitute mismatches between student housing capacity supply and university demand for higher education. 

Among these patterns, one of the most important is pressure on the student housing market. Based on the conclusions drawn in the Capacities, Demand & Spatial Distribution Chapter, it can be assumed that pressure on the market is not evenly distributed. 

## Why? Assess Spatial Demand–Supply Imbalances

The aim of this chapter is to assess the student housing market imbalances, identify areas where demand exceeds supply by answering the following research questions:

**How do student university demand compare to student housing market housing capacities?**

**Where do spatial patterns of demand and supply generate elevated market pressure?**

The answers to these questions are necessary to understand how and where pressure on the student housing market is formed in the city.

## How? Spatial Data Analysis

Unlike the Capacities, Demand & Spatial Distribution Chapter, where the analysis of the two systems was conducted sequentially, this chapter aimed to combine the data using spatial join and conduct a comparative analysis of the student housing market according to the Central Place Theory outlined in the Theoretical Framework chapter. 

**Spatial Join**    
A spatial join combines represented geographic objects and their associated attributes based on a spatial relationship (University of West Florida and Morgan, 2023). In other words, spatial joins allow you to combine multiple data sets based on spatial characteristics. For example, you can calculate the total student housing capacity and university demand for the Mitte district. 

However, such a rough approach is not suitable for a detailed analysis of the student housing market, as Berlin's districts vary greatly in size, so simple spatial intersection and subsequent aggregation distort the real picture of market pressure. In order to increase the accuracy of the spatial join, an isochrone accessibility analysis was performed. 

**Isochrone Analysis**  
An isochrone in geography and urban planning is a polygon that depicts the area accessible from a point within a certain time threshold, i.e., isochrones calculate accessibility in terms of time (OpenStreetMap Wiki, 2025). This allows administrative district boundaries to be replaced with more functional zones - zones of student mobility. Thus, isochrone analysis eliminates the problem of mismatched district areas and focuses on the actual patterns of student movement. 

Based on isochrones, it is possible to perform a spatial join between university demand and student housing capacity. However, such isochrones often overlap with each other, which leads to the problem of overlap. One solution to the problem of overlap is rasterisation. 

**Rasterisation**       
Rasterisation converts vectors into rasters. In Geospatial Science, it usually means converting vector geometry to raster geometry. It can be used to summarise data from several objects. Since accessibility isochrones intersect with each other, rasterisation — the conversion of geometry into a regular grid — is performed to match spatially heterogeneous supply and demand data.

These research methods allow for a parallel assessment of market areas and show how spatial patterns exacerbate or mitigate the shortage of student housing, forming or neutralising market pressure. 

Thus, the chapter demonstrates the geography of the student housing market, identifying the most problematic areas. 